---
permalink: /inputs_outputs
---

# Inputs & Outputs

## Single In-/Output

Just add the label `input=` to your dockerfile. Same for outputs.

## Multiple In-/Outputs

Since Dockerfile's label syntax only allows one value per label-key, and arrays are only parsed as strings, you can add multiple inputs with `input_1=<your first input>`, `input_2=<your second input>`. Same for outputs.

## Syntax

The simplest syntax for an input is just the name of its type. Let's say you're creating a node which adds two numbers together. The syntax would be

    LABEL input_1=number
    LABEL input_2=number

::: tip
You can combine multiple labels into a single Docker build layer like this:

    LABEL input_1="number" \
          input_2="number"

:::

Inputs can be customized a lot, by adding more information to the label. The syntax is

    input="name[,arg1[,arg2[...]]]"

Making every subsequent argument optional. Only the name is required. All of this holds true for outputs as well.

## Input Arguments

| Position | Argument             | Meaning                                                                             | Default            |
| -------- | -------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------ |
| 1        | Name                 | Name of this input's type. This makes the input conform to other Nodes' outputs.    | :heavy_minus_sign: |
| 2        | Flag                 | How to pass the input to the tool. Will be prepended, i.e. `-f` -> `-f <input>`     | (empty)            |
| 3        | required \| optional | Optional parameters may be missing.                                                 | required           |
| 4        | filename \| content  | Set to `content` if the tool does not take filenames as inputs.                     | filename           |
| 5        | Filename             | Bio Node works on folder-inputs by default, you can specify a single filename here. | (empty)            |

### Special Cases

#### Filenames

If you specify a filename, your tool will always be run with `<job-folder>/<filename>` as the run parameter.

Otherwise, since most tools run on single files, Bio Node will try to find a single file inside each folder and use it as input.
If you want to disable this behavior, set a file name manually. Folders that don't contain one file (so either many, or zero)
cannot be inferred. In this case, the folder-name is used as the run argument.

Using the foldername as the input even though it only contains one file is not supported. You can work around this limitation
by setting the filename to `/`, resulting in `<job-folder>//` which linux usually interprets as `<job-folder>/`.

#### Special Flags

-   **stdin**: Pass this input as stdin to the executed tool. Only valid for a single input per Node. Using stdin changes the default for "filename \| content" to content. If you set stdin to content, the filename will be passed as stdin via echo.

## Output Arguments

| Position | Argument | Meaning                                                                           | Default            |
| -------- | -------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------ |
| 1        | Name     | Name of this output's type. This makes the output conform to other Nodes' inputs. | :heavy_minus_sign: |
| 2        | Flag     | How to pass the output to the tool. Will be prepended, i.e. `-o` -> `-o <output>` | stdout             |
| 3        | Filename | Which filename to give the output                                                 | results.out        |

### Special Cases

#### Filenames

If you specify a filename or don't set the argument, your tool will always be run with `<job-folder>/<filename>` as the run parameter. The default filename is `results.out`.
If you set the argument to be empty (leaving a trailing comma in the output spec), it will be run with `<job-folder>` as the run parameter.

::: warning
Usually, an empty argument is interpreted as _default value_. The output filename is the only parameter where this is not the case.  
Why? Skipping arguments by adding commas is a convenience to manually set arguments that are further in the chain.
Since the filename is the last argument, you'll never skip it to specify a later argument. Setting the output filename to (empty)
actually conveys a meaning. The same does not hold true for inputs, where the auto detection is in place.
:::

The folder is created before the tool is executed, the file is not.
If a folder remains empty after job execution, it is removed afterwards.

#### Special Flags

-   **stdout**: Create the output from the tool's stdout.
-   **workindir**: Expect the output file to be created inside the current working dir. No run parameter is specified. In this mode, leaving the filename empty will move all files that were created during the tool's execution to the output. Only one output with workingdir and no filename is allowed. To avoid moving over named workingdir files, put this output at the end. See the example below.

## Example Image with In- & Outputs

We'll assume that `add` produces the resulting number inside `resulting_file.txt`, which is the output we're looking for.
It also prints more verbose output of the summation (`1+2=3`) to stdout. We want to keep that as well.
Lastly, if any errors occurred, there might be log files that were created in the working directory. We'll keep them as
our last output.

    # Your image needs to have /bin/sh installed.
    # i.e. alpine, ubuntu, ...
    FROM alpine

    # < commands to build your image >

    ENTRYPOINT ["add"]
    # Example produces 1+2=3
    CMD ["1", "2"]

    # ↓ Bio Node config below ↓
    LABEL bio-node="v1.0" \
        output_1="number,workingdir,resulting_file.txt" \
        output_2="log file,stdout,output.log" \
        output_3="error logs,workingdir" \
        input_1="number,,,content" \
        input_2="number,,,content"
    # Leaving out any argument will set it to the default value.

::: warning
Swapping outputs 1 and 3 would break the Node, since `resulting_file.txt` will be part of the `error logs` instead of the `number` output.
:::
